README.rst, before:

==================================
Transcription Factor Target Search
==================================

This site will allow users to search for gene transcription factors and find potential target genes.

Quickstart
----------

The server and all of it's dependencies are installed on our AWS instance, so simply visit it's IP address in your browser.
For login details and the IP address, check your email.
Once you're logged in, cd into /srv/tftarget and you can begin development.


Running the Server Locally
----------------------------------------

From this point on, all commands will implicitly be run from the project root directory, that is, the one this README is in.

If you have the dependencies installed, simply run ``python manage.py runserver``, then visit ``127.0.0.1:8000`` in a browser.

If you don't have the dependencies installed, start by getting Python 2.7.3.
You can `download it for free`_ from python.org.

Now, you'll need to get pip, the Python Package Manager.
For all operating systems, `these instructions`_ will suffice.
On Debian-based Linux distributions, an easier way to get pip is to run ``apt-get install python-setuptools; easy_install pip``.
Special note to Windows users:  you may need to edit your path if the instruction above don't work, see this `Stack Overflow discussion`_.

If you plan on doing any other Python projects, particularly Django ones, you should probably ``pip install virtualenv virtualenvwrapper`` and create a virtual environment for the project.
See the `documentation for virtualenvwrapper`_ if you think you'll do any other large Python projects, otherwise you can skip this step.

Now install the rest of the Python package dependencies by running ``pip install -r requirements.txt``.
Next, follow the instructions below for installing MySQL and South, and you should have all the dependencies installed.


MySQL
-----

The quickstart above is sufficient for  getting a server that can run, but eventually you'll need to install MySQL and setup Django to use it.
MySQL can be downloaded from `their website`_ and installed by following the directions.
During install, you should be asked to create a password for the ``root`` user.
Do this, and don't forget the password, you will need it soon and may need it later in an emergency.
On Debian-based Linux distributions, an easier way to get MySQL is to run ``apt-get install mysql-server``.

Once MySQL is installed, you'll need to get the Python library for talking to it.
If you're on a Debian-based Linux distribution, you can install it with ``apt-get install python-mysqldb``.
Other Linux distributions should have a similar package available, but the Python MySQLdb library cannot be installed on Windows without having to edit a few files manually.
Talk to me (Joel Friedly) and I'll try to get you working on Windows.
If you're unsure whether or not your MySQLdb installation worked, open a Python interpreter and run ``import MySQLdb``.

Once the Python library is installed, you'll need to create your ``tftarget`` MySQL user.
To do this, run ``mysql -u root -p`` and enter the root password that you picked above, then input these SQL commands at the prompt, where $PASSWORD is a new password that you choose::

    mysql> CREATE USER 'tftarget'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY '$PASSWORD';
    mysql> CREATE DATABASE tftarget DEFAULT CHARACTER SET utf8 DEFAULT COLLATE utf8_general_ci;
    mysql> GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON tftarget.* to 'tftarget'@'localhost' WITH GRANT OPTION;

MySQL should tell you that each query was ok.
Exit the MySQL prompt and now create a file in this directory called ``local_settings.py``.
Put the following lines into the file and save it, making up a secret key to use for hashing::

    import settings

    settings.DATABASES['default']['PASSWORD'] = '$PASSWORD'
    settings.SECRET_KEY = "$SECRET_KEY"

Ensure that Django has access to the MySQL database by opening a Python interpreter with ``python manage.py shell`` and then running these commands::

    >>> from search.models import Experiment
    >>> e = Experiment(species='Human', cell_line='frankencells!')
    >>> e.save()
    >>> e.delete()


Using South
'''''''''''

Databases complain whenever a table schema is changed, and anytime you make a change to a class in a models.py file it represents a change to a table schema.
South makes migrating table schemas easy, without losing your data.
Information on South can be found on `their tutorial`_, and you should already have it installed if the ``pip install -r requirements.txt`` worked.
The first thing you'll need to do is run a ``python manage.py syncdb``, and create a Django admin user by following the prompts (don't skip creating the admin user, you'll need this later).
Then, run this command for each app that we built, replacing $APP_NAME with the name of the app (currently we've only created one app, called ``search``)::

    $ python manage.py migrate $APP_NAME

In order to load the latest SQL dump, run these commands, giving the root user's password at the prompt each time::

    $ mysql -u root -p tftarget < sqldumps/search_experiment.sql
    $ mysql -u root -p tftarget < sqldumps/search_gene.sql


Currently, we have a simple shell script that will run all of the commands to reload the database from the sqldumps.
You can call it with::

    $ tools/reloaddb.sh

What to do if the ID's are Wrong
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If you run into errors that rows are attempting to foreign key to other rows that don't exist when you're trying to import the data, read on.
Simply drop the table with ``DROP TABLE $TABLE_NAME`` and then try to import the data again using ``mysql -uroot -p tftarget < $TABLE_NAME.sql``.
Depending on which table it was, you may need to drop some other tables first because of foreign key constraints.
The many-to-many lookup tables can always be dropped, and once those are gone, any of the others can be dropped.
The tables can be restored in any order (I think).
If this doesn't work, don't worry, we're just using fake data for now.
Do NOT do this on a production database.

How to Export the Database to a SQLdump
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
::

    $ mysqldump -u root -p tftarget search_experiment > sqldumps/search_experiment.sql
    $ mysqldump -u root -p tftarget search_gene > sqldumps/search_gene.sql

How to Import Data from CSVs
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the ``csv`` directory, we have six CSV files, an orthologs file and a file for each transcription factor family.
To load the experiments from the CSV files, type the following command, replacing ``$TF_FAMILY`` with the families that you'd like to load.
Run the command once for each family::

    $ python manage.py updatedb csv/$TF_FAMILY.csv

To load the orthologs from the CSV file, type this::

    $ python manage.py importorthologs csv/orthologs.csv

If you'd like to update the database to a new version, you can use these commands with new CSV files and additions to the database will occur automatically.
Please note that the ``updatedb`` and ``importorthologs`` commands will not delete or modify any existing rows in the database, they will only add new rows.
If a row changes, this will be considered an addition; the old row will remain in the database and the "new" row will be added.
If you would like to explicitly delete a row from the database or change an existing row, you can use the MySQL database shell, an interactive Python session, or the admin pages; but the admin pages are probably the easiest to use.

To log into the admin page, navigate to the ``/admin`` URL and log in with any existing Django user (you created one when you set up South).
Find the experiment or gene row in the database that you'd like to change and click on it.
The new page will have a form that you can use to update or delete the row.
If you'd like to do a "soft delete", i.e. make the row invisible to end users without actually losing any data, just uncheck the box that says 'Active' (this is highly recommended, don't click the delete button unless you're sure).


About Python
------------

The best introduction to Python that I know of is the `Python Tutorial`_ at python.org.
Other highly recommended tutorials include `Dive into Python`_ and `Learn Python the Hard Way`_.


About Django
------------

The `Django Tutorial`_ is an excellent four-part starter series on Django.
It will assume that you know at least a little Python though.


.. _download it for free: http://python.org/download/releases/2.7.3/
.. _these instructions: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools
.. _Stack Overflow discussion: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/4750806/how-to-install-pip-on-windows
.. _documentation for virtualenvwrapper: http://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/
.. _their website: http://www.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/
.. _their tutorial: http://south.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorial/part1.html
.. _Python Tutorial: http://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/
.. _Dive into Python: http://www.diveintopython.net/
.. _Learn Python the Hard Way: http://learnpythonthehardway.org/
.. _Django Tutorial: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/intro/tutorial01/

Commit message:

Installed SciPy and created instructions, cleaned out uni_form

README.rst, after:

==================================
Transcription Factor Target Search
==================================

This site will allow users to search for gene transcription factors and find potential target genes.

Quickstart
----------

The server and all of it's dependencies are installed on our AWS instance, so simply visit it's IP address in your browser.
For login details and the IP address, check your email.
Once you're logged in, cd into /srv/tftarget and you can begin development.


Running the Server Locally
----------------------------------------

From this point on, all commands will implicitly be run from the project root directory, that is, the one this README is in.

If you have the dependencies installed, simply run ``python manage.py runserver``, then visit ``127.0.0.1:8000`` in a browser.

If you don't have the dependencies installed, start by getting Python 2.7.3.
You can `download it for free`_ from python.org.

Now, you'll need to get pip, the Python Package Manager.
For all operating systems, `these instructions`_ will suffice.
On Debian-based Linux distributions, an easier way to get pip is to run ``apt-get install python-setuptools; easy_install pip``.
Special note to Windows users:  you may need to edit your path if the instruction above don't work, see this `Stack Overflow discussion`_.

If you plan on doing any other Python projects, particularly Django ones, you should probably ``pip install virtualenv virtualenvwrapper`` and create a virtual environment for the project.
See the `documentation for virtualenvwrapper`_ if you think you'll do any other large Python projects, otherwise you can skip this step.

Most of the dependencies can then be installed by running ``pip install -r requirements.txt``, with the exceptions of SciPy and MySQL.


SciPy
-----

Typically, dependencies should be isolated to the ``requirements.txt`` file whenever possible.
However, SciPy is difficult to install with ``pip`` on any operating system.
On Linux, it's as simple as an ``apt-get install python-scipy`` (or the equivalent on distros that don't use aptitude).
Otherwise, see the `Windows SciPy installation instructions`_ or the `OSX ones`_ on scipy.org.


MySQL
-----

The quickstart above is sufficient for  getting a server that can run, but eventually you'll need to install MySQL and setup Django to use it.
MySQL can be downloaded from `their website`_ and installed by following the directions.
During install, you should be asked to create a password for the ``root`` user.
Do this, and don't forget the password, you will need it soon and may need it later in an emergency.
On Debian-based Linux distributions, an easier way to get MySQL is to run ``apt-get install mysql-server``.

Once MySQL is installed, you'll need to get the Python library for talking to it.
If you're on a Debian-based Linux distribution, you can install it with ``apt-get install python-mysqldb``.
Other Linux distributions should have a similar package available, but the Python MySQLdb library cannot be installed on Windows without having to edit a few files manually.
Talk to me (Joel Friedly) and I'll try to get you working on Windows.
If you're unsure whether or not your MySQLdb installation worked, open a Python interpreter and run ``import MySQLdb``.

Once the Python library is installed, you'll need to create your ``tftarget`` MySQL user.
To do this, run ``mysql -u root -p`` and enter the root password that you picked above, then input these SQL commands at the prompt, where $PASSWORD is a new password that you choose::

    mysql> CREATE USER 'tftarget'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY '$PASSWORD';
    mysql> CREATE DATABASE tftarget DEFAULT CHARACTER SET utf8 DEFAULT COLLATE utf8_general_ci;
    mysql> GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON tftarget.* to 'tftarget'@'localhost' WITH GRANT OPTION;

MySQL should tell you that each query was ok.
Exit the MySQL prompt and now create a file in this directory called ``local_settings.py``.
Put the following lines into the file and save it, making up a secret key to use for hashing:

.. code:: python

    import settings

    settings.DATABASES['default']['PASSWORD'] = '$PASSWORD'
    settings.SECRET_KEY = "$SECRET_KEY"

Ensure that Django has access to the MySQL database by opening a Python interpreter with ``python manage.py shell`` and then running these commands:

.. code:: python

    >>> from search.models import Experiment
    >>> e = Experiment(species='Human', cell_line='frankencells!')
    >>> e.save()
    >>> e.delete()


Using South
'''''''''''

Databases complain whenever a table schema is changed, and anytime you make a change to a class in a models.py file it represents a change to a table schema.
South makes migrating table schemas easy, without losing your data.
Information on South can be found on `their tutorial`_, and you should already have it installed if the ``pip install -r requirements.txt`` worked.
The first thing you'll need to do is run a ``python manage.py syncdb``, and create a Django admin user by following the prompts.
Then, run this command for each app that we built, replacing $APP_NAME with the name of the app (currently we've only created one app, called ``search``):

.. code:: bash

    $ python manage.py migrate $APP_NAME

In order to load the latest SQL dump, run these commands, giving the root user's password at the prompt each time:

.. code:: bash

    $ mysql -u root -p tftarget < sqldumps/search_experiment.sql
    $ mysql -u root -p tftarget < sqldumps/search_gene.sql


Currently, we have a simple shell script that will run both of the above commands for you.
You can call it with:

.. code:: bash

    $ tools/reloaddb.sh

What to do if the ID's are Wrong
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If you run into errors that rows are attempting to foreign key to other rows that don't exist when you're trying to import the data, read on.
Simply drop the table with ``DROP TABLE $TABLE_NAME`` and then try to import the data again using ``mysql -uroot -p tftarget < $TABLE_NAME.sql``.
Depending on which table it was, you may need to drop some other tables first because of foreign key constraints.
The many-to-many lookup tables can always be dropped, and once those are gone, any of the others can be dropped.
The tables can be restored in any order (I think).
If this doesn't work, don't worry, we're just using fake data for now.
Do NOT do this on a production database.

How to Export the Database to a SQLdump
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
.. code:: bash

    $ mysqldump -u root -p tftarget search_experiment > sqldumps/search_experiment.sql
    $ mysqldump -u root -p tftarget search_gene > sqldumps/search_gene.sql

How to Import Data from CSVs
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the ``csv`` directory, we have six CSV files, an orthologs file and a file for each transcription factor family.
To load the experiments from the CSV files, type the following command, replacing ``$TF_FAMILY`` with the families that you'd like to load.
Run the command once for each family::

    $ python manage.py updatedb csv/$TF_FAMILY.csv

To load the orthologs from the CSV file, type this::

    $ python manage.py importorthologs csv/orthologs.csv

If you'd like to update the database to a new version, you can use these commands with new CSV files and additions to the database will occur automatically.
Please note that the ``updatedb`` and ``importorthologs`` commands will not delete or modify any existing rows in the database, they will only add new rows.
If a row changes, this will be considered an addition; the old row will remain in the database and the "new" row will be added.
If you would like to explicitly delete a row from the database or change an existing row, you can use the MySQL database shell, an interactive Python session, or the admin pages; but the admin pages are probably the easiest to use.

To log into the admin page, navigate to the ``/admin`` URL and log in with any existing Django user (you created one when you set up South).
Find the experiment or gene row in the database that you'd like to change and click on it.
The new page will have a form that you can use to update or delete the row.
If you'd like to do a "soft delete", i.e. make the row invisible to end users without actually losing any data, just uncheck the box that says 'Active' (this is highly recommended, don't click the delete button unless you're sure).


About Python
------------

The best introduction to Python that I know of is the `Python Tutorial`_ at python.org.
Other highly recommended tutorials include `Dive into Python`_ and `Learn Python the Hard Way`_.


About Django
------------

The `Django Tutorial`_ is an excellent four-part starter series on Django.
It will assume that you know at least a little Python though.


.. _download it for free: http://python.org/download/releases/2.7.3/
.. _these instructions: http://pypi.python.org/pypi/setuptools
.. _Stack Overflow discussion: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/4750806/how-to-install-pip-on-windows
.. _documentation for virtualenvwrapper: http://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/
.. _their website: http://www.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/
.. _their tutorial: http://south.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorial/part1.html
.. _Python Tutorial: http://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/
.. _Dive into Python: http://www.diveintopython.net/
.. _Learn Python the Hard Way: http://learnpythonthehardway.org/
.. _Django Tutorial: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/intro/tutorial01/
.. _Windows SciPy installation instructions: http://www.scipy.org/Installing_SciPy/Windows
.. _OSX ones: http://www.scipy.org/Installing_SciPy/Mac_OS_X
